Add architecture scenarios guide (#1037)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/guides/architecture-scenarios.mdx

---

> title: Architecture Scenarios

Reviewer: The H1 will define the `title`

```suggestion
```

description: This guide outlines a number of the common architecture scenarios for building applications with Clerk, their characteristics, and limitations.
---

> # Architecture Scenarios

Reviewer: We use sentence-casing for headings!

```suggestion
# Architecture scenarios
```

Reviewer 2: @issuedat For me this change isn't appearing in the GH web view, but maybe it's just a glitch? Here's what I see:
![image](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/assets/5156915/682597a7-8781-4cc6-a3eb-9ae4793248c6)

I know sometimes the "files changed" view on GH doesn't update if you force push a commit, so if this is changed locally for you then that's fine 👍

Author: You're right @S3Prototype! It looks like I manually changed that after having applied the suggestion. Sorry about that — I pushed a change to update it, here's the preview:

<img width="724" alt="Screenshot 2024-06-03 at 15 03 15" src="https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/assets/165281975/577e6c3f-237f-46ef-96e9-17e523a253b7">

Reviewer 2: Awesome, thanks ❤️

There are several ways to model how users and organizations fit into your application. The 3 scenarios that will be covered in this guide are:

1. B2C: Business to Consumer
2. B2B: Business to Business
3. Platforms

We will share some of the common characteristics of apps in each scenario as well as the level of support for these features in Clerk.

## B2C: Business to Consumer

> B2C companies focus on selling products or services directly to consumers. Some popular examples are Netflix, Headspace, and Spotify.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
B2C companies sell products or services directly to consumers. Some popular examples are Netflix, Headspace, and Spotify.
```
Simplification

The B2C user management model is the simplest of the three and it is the default model supported by Clerk out of the box, with little-to-no configuration.

In a B2C scenario, applications generally share the following characteristics:

- A user creates a single account with your service
- There is a single, shared user-pool which all the users belong to
- Any connections enabled for your application are available to all users to authenticate with
- The application branding is that of your company (i.e.: not white-labelled per customer or organization)

> - The application is accessible under a single domain (e.g.: `example.com` or `app.example.com`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The application is accessible under a single domain (for example: `example.com` or `app.example.com`)
```

> **TODO: diagram of B2C app with Clerk**

Author: Pending diagrams from design

<Callout type="info">

> In the B2C scenario, organizations are generally not necessary since users that sign-up to your application typically do not exist as part of a team, organization, or workspace.

Reviewer: In this case, "sign up" is a verb and not a noun, so the hyphen is not needed!

```suggestion
In the B2C scenario, organizations are generally not necessary since users that sign up to your application typically do not exist as part of a team, organization, or workspace.
```

</Callout>

## B2B: Business to Business

B2B companies sell to other businesses. Some examples include: GitHub, Vercel, Salesforce, Sentry, and Clerk.

> In the B2B model, multi-tenant SaaS applications generally leverage organizations (sometimes called teams or workspaces) to manage users and their memberships to control what resources they have access to across different organizations based on their roles.

Reviewer: Let's break up this run-on sentence!

```suggestion
In the B2B model, multi-tenant SaaS applications generally leverage organizations (sometimes called teams or workspaces) to manage users and their memberships. This approach allows for control over what resources users have access to across different organizations based on their roles.
```

> Often-times such applications will also allow users to create personal accounts that are separate from other organizations. For example, GitHub allows users to create repositories under their own personal account or an organization they are part of.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Oftentimes such applications will also allow users to create personal accounts that are separate from other organizations. For example, GitHub allows users to create repositories under their own personal account or an organization they are part of.
```

> **TODO: diagram of B2B app with Clerk**

Author: Pending diagrams from design

> The user pool for a multi-tenant, SaaS applications will generally fall into one of two categories:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user pool for multi-tenant, SaaS applications will generally fall into one of two categories:
```

1. **Shared user-pool**: the application has a single pool of users. A user can create one account and belong to multiple organizations. The user can have separate roles in each organization.
2. **Isolated user-pool**: each organization has its own pool of users. A user must create a separate account for each organization.

<Callout type="info">

> Clerk supports the shared user-pool model for B2B scenarios which will be discussed in this section. The isolated user-pool model is more relevant in the Platforms scenario which will be discussed in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clerk supports the **shared user-pool** model for B2B scenarios which will be discussed in this section. The **isolated user-pool** model is more relevant in the Platforms scenario which will be discussed in the next section.
```

</Callout>

B2B SaaS applications with the following characteristics are well-supported with Clerk:

- A single application deployment that serves multiple business customers (multi-tenant)
- A shared user-pool model where a user can log in with a single account and belong to multiple organizations

> - Enabled connections are available to all users (i.e.: connections cannot be configured at the organization level)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enabled connections are available to all users (as in, connections cannot be configured at the organization level)
```

- The application may carry your own branding or some elements of your customer's branding

> - The application is served from a single domain (e.g.: `app.example.com`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The application is served from a single domain (for example: `app.example.com`)
```

### Integrating organizations with your application

> Clerk offers a number of building blocks to help integrate Organizations into your application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clerk offers a number of building blocks to help integrate organizations into your application:
```

- The [`<OrganizationSwitcher />` component](https://clerk.com/docs/components/organization/organization-switcher) provides a way for your users to select which organization is active. The [`useOrganizationList()` hook](https://clerk.com/docs/organizations/custom-organization-switcher) can be used for more control.
- The [`useOrganization()` hook](https://clerk.com/docs/references/react/use-organization) can be used to fetch the current, active organization.

> - The [`<Protect />` component](https://clerk.com/docs/components/protect) enables you to limit who can view certain pages based on their role. Additionally, Clerk exposes a number of helper functions [`auth()`](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/auth) and hooks [`useAuth()`](https://clerk.com/docs/references/react/use-auth#how-to-use-the-use-auth-hook) to check the user's authorization throughout your app and API endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [`<Protect />` component](https://clerk.com/docs/components/protect) enables you to limit who can view certain pages based on their role. Additionally, Clerk exposes a number of helper functions, such as [`auth()`](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/auth), and hooks, such as [`useAuth()`](https://clerk.com/docs/references/react/use-auth#how-to-use-the-use-auth-hook), to check the user's authorization throughout your app and API endpoints.
```

> The organization's ID should be stored in your database, alongside each resource so that it can be used to filter and query the resources that should be rendered or returned according to the active organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The organization's ID should be stored in your database alongside each resource so that it can be used to filter and query the resources that should be rendered or returned according to the active organization.
```

> ## Platforms

Reviewer 2: Why should we document this if it's not currently supported? Might be best to just mention that it's not currently supported but on the roadmap, and they can upvote it

Author: We get quite a few questions from customers on a weekly-basis about various scenarios that would fit well under the Platforms scenario.

The goal here is to list a few of the common characteristics of the platforms scenario so that customers can identify whether their use case fits into that scenario and know that we don't currently support it but they can upvote it and share their feedback.

This saves the extra step of customers reaching out to support and trying to describe their use-case only to redirect them to the roadmap item.

<Callout type="info">

> Today, Clerk does not currently support the Platforms scenario. We are working on [Clerk for Platforms](https://feedback.clerk.com/roadmap/3b40265e-d8ae-41b0-a4b3-9c947d460218) to enable developers building platforms to offer their users the full range of features and customizability of Clerk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today, Clerk does not currently support the Platforms scenario. We are working on [Clerk for Platforms](https://feedback.clerk.com/roadmap/3b40265e-d8ae-41b0-a4b3-9c947d460218) to enable developers building platforms to offer their users Clerk's full range of features and customizability.
```

</Callout>

> In the Platforms scenario, businesses can create multiple, isolated applications with their own user pools, branding, security policies, and limits. Some examples in this scenarios are e-commerce platforms like Shopify, e-learning platforms, mortgage lending platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Platforms scenario, businesses can create multiple, isolated applications with their own user pools, branding, security policies, and limits. Some examples in this scenario are e-commerce platforms like Shopify, e-learning platforms, and mortgage lending platforms.
```

> For example, you may be creating an e-learning platform that allows universities to create courses and enroll students. In this case, each customer would be a university who would have their own set of students, professors, and administrators as their users. Additionally, each university would likely have a custom domain (`courses.example.com`) with their branding where their users can authenticate and use the platform.

Reviewer: Nice example!!

In the e-learning platform scenario, the users of one university should be completely isolated from another university and each university might have its own set of authentication strategies and security policies.

> **TODO: diagram of Platforms app with Clerk**

Author: Pending diagrams from design

> The following are some of the most commonly requested features for the Platforms scenario (Clerk for Platforms) that Clerk does not currently support but we are working to support them in the near future:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are some of the most commonly requested features for the Platforms scenario (Clerk for Platforms):
```

- Vanity domains (`customer.example.com`) or a custom domain (`customer.com`) for each of your customers

> - Allow your customers to independently customize their branding, including their authentication screens, sms and email templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow your customers to independently customize their branding, including their authentication screens, SMS and email templates
```

- Isolated user pools such that users from one customer are logically separated from users of another customer

> - Independently enforce different limits based on your customer's subscription (e.g.: limit their number of users they can invite to an organization)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Independently enforce different limits based on your customer's subscription (for example: limit their number of users they can invite to an organization)
```
